Translating Messages
Overview

There are two separate message catalogs in aurman- one for the backend (???) and
one for the frontend (aurman and scripts). These correspond to the
lib/libalpm/po and po directories in the aurman source, respectively.

Translation message files are a specially formatted text file containing the original message and the corresponding translation. These po files can then either be hand edited, or modified with a tool such as poedit, gtranslator or kbabel. Using a translation tool tends to make the job easier.

See the Notes section for additional hints on translating.
Pre-release Updates

A week or two before each release, the codebase will go into a string freeze and
an email will be sent by the translation lieutenant to the aurman-dev mailing list asking for translations. This email will have a prefix of [translation] for anyone looking to set up an email filter.

At this time, the .po language files will be made available at a URL specified in the email. Each language will have two files available (backend and frontend). Translators interested in helping are encouraged to send a follow-up message to the mailing list stating exactly what they intend to translate so efforts are not duplicated on the same language.

Once a translator has completed the translation (OR realizes they do not have time to finish), please email the .po files back to the list with a subject such as [translation] Updated German translation. At this point, the translation lieutenant will gather the translations together for inclusion in the upcoming release.
Note
	Please email your translations back to the list as soon as possible- this will give other speakers of your language time to review your translations and update them as necessary.

For those familiar with GIT, you may wish to follow the procedure outlined below as another alternative.
Incremental Updates

If you have more advanced needs you will have to get a copy of the aurman repository.

git clone git://projects.archlinux.org/aurman.git aurman

Next, you will need to run ./autogen.sh and ./configure in the base directory to generate the correct Makefiles. At this point, all necessary make targets will be generated and we can begin updating the translation files.

We need to first update the main message catalog file. Navigate into either the lib/libalpm/po or po directory depending on which translation you wish to work on first, and execute the following command. If you are working in the po/ tree, replace libalpm.pot with pacman.pot:

make libalpm.pot-update

Next, update your specific language’s translation file:

make <po file>-update

At this point, you can do the translation. To submit your changes, either email the new .po file to the mailing-list with [translation] in the subject, or submit a GIT-formatted patch (please do not include any .pot file changes).

As a shortcut, all translation files (including .pot files) can be updated with the following command:

make update-po

Adding a New Language

Making a new language is not too hard, but be sure to follow all the steps. You
will have to do the following steps in both the lib/libalpm/po/ and po/
directories, substituting where appropriate. First, edit the LINGUAS file and
add your new language code at the bottom. Next, run the following command,
    substituting libalpm.pot or auraman.pot for potfile depending on which directory you are currently working in:

msginit -l <lang code> -o <lang code>.po -i <potfile>

You can then also add your language code to the end of the LINGUAS file located in each po directory.

Look at the current message files for more guidance if necessary. Once you create the new language file, you may need to slightly modify the headers; try to make them look similar to the other .po file headers. In addition, for all new translations we would strongly recommend using UTF-8 encoding.
Notes

msgid and msgstr variables can be on as many lines as necessary. Line breaks are ignored- if you need a literal line break, use an \n in your string. The following two translations are equivalent:

msgstr "This is a test translation"

msgstr ""
"This is a test translation"

If you want to test the translation (for example, the frontend one):

rm *.gmo stamp-po
make
cp <lang code>.gmo /usr/share/locale/<lang code>/LC_MESSAGES/aurman.mo

Translating Manpages

There are currently no efforts underway to include translated manpages in the
aurman codebase. However, this is not to say translations are unwelcome. If
someone has experience with i18n manpages and how to best include them with our
source, please contact the aurman-dev mailing list at aurman-dev@archlinux.org.

Some community efforts have been made to translate manpages, and these can be found in the AUR (Arch User Repository). Please check there first before undergoing a translation effort to ensure you are not duplicating efforts.
Last updated 2009-08-03 07:37:13 CDT

